The mitral valve controls the flow of blood
from the left atrium of the heart to the left ventricle.
There are different types of mitral valve disease.
Mitral valve prolapse is a condition in which
the mitral valve leaflets are floppy or loose
and don’t close tightly.
This causes blood to leak backward
into the left atrium.
Mitral valve stenosis is a condition in which
the leaflets become thick or stiff
causing a narrowed valve opening
and reduced blood flow through the valve.
Treatment for mitral valve disease
depends on several factors including
how severe your condition is
and if you are experiencing signs and symptoms.
Your doctor may recommend
mitral valve repair or mitral valve replacement.
Several surgical procedures exist
to repair or replace mitral valves,
including open-heart surgery,
which involves a cut in the center of the chest,
or by using minimally invasive methods,
which involve smaller incisions in the chest.
Mitral valve repair preserves your mitral valve.
Two leaflets make up the mitral valve,
the anterior leaflet and the posterior leaflet.
Repairing the valve depends on your specific condition.
To repair the valve your doctor may
remove a piece from the mitral valve.
and suture together the edges
or replace the cords on the unsupported free edge
of the leaflet to repair the support for the valve.
Or your doctor may need to separate
valve leaflets that have fused together.
Typically, a supportive ring is also placed
around the valve to complete the repair.
If your mitral valve cannot be repaired,
your doctor may recommend mitral valve replacement.
During the prodedure,
your doctor will remove the damaged valve
and replace it with a tissue or mechanical valve.
What type of valve is used
will depend on your age, your disease,
and your willingness to take anticoagulation medicines.
Tissue valves come from a pig, from a cow, or from a human.
These valves are very similar to your own valve
and because your own body accepts them well,
you will not require long term blood-thinning medication.
The disadvantage of tissue valves, however,
is that they are less durable
than either our own valves or mechanical valves.
Mechanical valves are more durable
but are not natural,
and they may cause blood clots to form.
Because of that possibility,
people who have mechanical valves
require blood-thinning medication
for the rest of their lives to prevent blood clots.